---
title: "Flat Vocality: Computation and the Violence of Representation in Art"
date: 2019-06-13T17:12:33.962Z
path: "/flat/polack"
image: "feature.jpg"
description: "A short story"
author: "Peter Polack"

img1: "artwork/artExample1.png"
img1txt: "Title of art by Example"

img2: "artwork/artExample1.png"
img2txt: "Title of art by Example"

img3: "artwork/artExample1.png"
img3txt: "Title of art by Example"

img4: "artwork/artExample1.png"
img4txt: "Title of art by Example"

img5: "artwork/artExample1.png"
img5txt: "Title of art by Example"

img6: "artwork/artExample1.png"
img6txt: "Title of art by Example"
---

##Introduction

Artworks about the tech industry, computational media, and algorithms have the capacity to inform or overturn how we understand computational processes when we confront them in our everyday lives. Today, however, it would seem that these artworks do more to affirm the dominance and permanence of computational infrastructures than to interrogate their limits and patterns of exploitation. Despite the most critical intentions of their producers, these artworks tend to amount to horrific fascination or insular mockery: reproductions of computational processes either dwarf us in their sublime complexity or present themselves as reflections of our own human fallibility. Thus it remains unclear whether these artworks contribute to the increasing disillusionment with computational infrastructures that we are witnessing today, as popularized by events like the Cambridge Analytica and Project Maven scandals, or whether they merely respond to this dissatisfaction by giving it a commercial outlet to dissipate through. Altogether, critical computational art appears less as an adversary to computational power than as a meditation on it. 

Rather than supposing that the complexity of computational infrastructures is too great to be confronted by artworks of any kind, we might interrogate how contemporary critical art is limited in its approach to thinking computation. To this end, I argue that critical art about computation stands to learn from some of the historical failures of art curation to represent the violence of representation maintained by primitivism and colonialism. What computational infrastructure shares with these regimes – and what is largely absent from art about it – is its capacity to establish modes of representation that in turn deny certain subjects the right to self-representation. Representation, or the presentation of an existing object, subject, or experience in a new context, becomes violent when it silences some aspect of the existing thing in this way, flattening it into what appears as a comprehensive presentation. Insofar as critical art about computation does not address this representational violence, it merely replicates the patterns of the tech industry and its products, which for their part depend on particular regimes of representation by their very nature. 

The artworks produced by primitivism and colonialism retain a special function in emblematizing the violence that comes from denying certain subjects the right to represent themselves. Where the cultural products of colonization bar certain people, populations, and identities from the right to self-representation, they also attest to the reality of this representational violence by putting it on display. Today, critical postcolonial artwork and art criticism is charged with seeing this process through: to document historical acts of representational violence, to identify their present incarnations, and to dispute their hegemony. Above all, such a project requires that a testament to polyvocality prevails over the flat univocal hegemony of imperial discourse, identity, and art. Provided a certain context, even imperialism attests to the reality of polyvocality experienced as its negative, and it is the assignment of contemporary postcolonial thought to position the imperial artist in such a way that polyvocality can be experienced through and despite him. Critical art about computation stands to learn from this work, not only because computational media itself enacts a flattening of polyvalence by encoding diverse speech acts into streamlined codes, but also because the skills and subjectivities required to do computational work and to intuit their criticisms are presently harbored by a minority of the world's population. 

In this article, I describe two controversial exhibitions that take representation as their subject matter, albeit in two very different ways, and nonetheless do not adequately relate the artworks and artifacts they present to their latent polyvocality. The first exhibition is Primitivism in 20th Century Art, which for Simon Gikandi subordinates the influence of African culture on Picasso's art to the heroic genius of its author (Gikandi, 2014). The second exhibition, Into the Heart of Africa, is meticulously dissected by Enid Schildkrout to reveal all the ways that it represents colonization at the expense of representing the experiences of those colonized (Schildkrout, 1991). These exhibitions in turn serve as precedents for the difficulty faced by contemporary critical art to think beyond the representational regime of computational infrastructure. To illustrate this connection, I describe a recent critical art exhibition about computational infrastructure called The Glass Room (theglassroomnyc.org). What becomes evident in this case is the stylistic preeminence of the curation and exhibition of the artworks over an interrogation of their implications. What results is an aesthetic of horrific fascination and foreboding, intelligible only to a particular audience that observes it from the outside: those privileged to visit a "tech store with a twist" to contemplate the future that its paraphernalia foretell. 

This article concludes by briefly addressing a limitation of modern critical art about computation according to Jacques Rancière's notion of the "distribution of the sensible" (Rancière, 2015). A distribution of the sensible is a particular organization of sensible experience that welcomes certain interpretations while denying others, and it is in this way a reflection on egalitarian politics. Thus Rancière's theory motivates us to consider how polyvocality can be represented in art, and to what extent this is possible. I read Rancière to conclude that agonism – a sense of contending perspectives and voices – should be introduced into critical art about computation, which for its part asserts the voice of computation above all others. 

##Metamorphosis in the Exhibition of Primitivism 

The artwork in the exhibition hall is not the same as it was in the artist's studio. It has been displaced, handled, and set in an environment that it did not originate in, and in this way it undergoes a re-presentation from one context to another. Such representations involve customs that dictate how the exhibited object should be handled, and it is through curation that the representation of the object into the exhibit is ordained, planned, and justified. It is not altogether surprising, then, to find the object of representation exhibited as a representation in itself: evincing a program of selection from existing elements and their presentation in a new form that deserves reflection and justification. Just so, when we regard Willian Rubin's essay "Picasso" for the MoMA catalog to Primitivism in 20th Century Art (Rubin, 1984; as cited in Gikandi, 2014), we find a description of Picasso's artistry that resembles the process of its representation in the museum: Picasso discerns, selects, and transforms objects of reference into a new context, and in doing so he enables us to behold and celebrate the journey of their creation.  
    
For Simon Gikandi (Gikandi, 2014), the process by which Picasso represents objects of reference in his paintings is made salient by the commentary on this process, which celebrates it as an act of metamorphosis. Rubin's MoMA commentary champions Picasso as a figure who "metamorphosized" African objects into the remarkable works of art put in display (Rubin, 1984; as quoted in Gikandi, 2014) – here metamorphosis indicates a process by which an artistic agent transforms an object into something of higher value. For Gikandi, metamorphosis reflects a rhetorical sleight of hand, whereby Rubin emphasizes Picasso's artistic genius at the same time as he downplays the role of the people who created his sources of inspiration. The violence of representation emerges here in the way that way that primitivist art is created, interpreted, and exhibited as a metamorphosis: metamorphosis emphasizes the agency and ingenuity of the European artist by marginalizing that of the Other that inspires him. 

Metamorphosis is not so much a type of representation as an account of one, a description of a representation. For Gikandi, this is a description that leverages rhetoric to emphasize the role of certain agents of representation over others. The role of the Other – the creator of the objects, forms, and materials that inspire the metamorphosis – is relegated to that of inert matter that exerts a vague influence on an agent of metamorphosis, the artist. This influence may be magical or subconscious, and what is crucial is that it does not appear as a direct or intentional contribution. For instance, Rubin notes how African objects to Picasso are "more witnesses than models" in his practice (Rubin, 1984; as quoted in Gikandi, 2014) – a distinction that markedly robs these objects of any agency that they might have in informing Picasso's art – they are present but not actively representing. Key to these assertions of metamorphosis is an emphasis on abstraction and inspiration, as opposed to acknowledging any coherent contribution of African subjects. 

Gikandi therefore counterposes metamorphosis to accounts of more direct and formal contributions to Picasso's style accredited to modernist artists like Gauguin and Cézanne. In Rubin's essay, this distinction between metamorphosis and formal aesthetic contributions is licensed by a theoretical armature that differentiates between "affinity" and "influence," or weak and strong intertextuality, respectively. For Rubin metamorphosis is catalyzed by an affinity of "conceptual signs, rather than through pictorial conventions directly derived from seeing" (Rubin, 1984; as quoted in Gikandi, 2014). In this way the theory of metamorphosis is a means of curating which agents and subjects can be accredited with having a substantial, "strong," and "influential" role in the process of making art, and which exist only at the periphery of the artist's consciousness. 

Thus metamorphosis for Gikandi reveals itself as an operation of purification or flattening, which asserts the originality of an artwork despite its derivation from extrinsic sources of inspiration. This effectively denies the Others of primitivist art their voices in accounting for the production of this art, substituting these voices and their agency for that of the primitivist artist. Through metamorphosis, existing modes of personal, cultural, and artistic self-representation are appropriated and represented as new representations; and what is more is that this processes is lauded as an achievement of the artist. In this way, metamorphosis is arrayed not so much to obscure an act of representation, but to valorize and celebrate it. Affinities, resemblances, and "morphological coincidences" (Gikandi, 2014) between African and primitivist art are not rejected but underscored, and they are glossed in such a way to emphasize the proficiency of the primitivist artist. Therefore, from the polyvocality of primitivist art – in all its sources of inspiration and intertextuality – emerges only the voice of the primitivist artist, mediated by his curator. 

Altogether, we can acknowledge in metamorphosis multiple operations of flattening that control and reduce the polyvocality of the primitivist artwork. In addition to subordinating the voices of African subjects to that of the primitivist artist, the theorist of metamorphosis licenses 
